---
layout: post
title:  "Parsing, or Memory Allocation"
date:   2017-02-27 12:22 EST5EDT
categories: eval-rs
comments: true
---

**tl;dr** I realized I can't parse into an AST until I have a place to put an AST, so
I need an allocator first.

# ParseError

I have spent an inordinate amount of time this week reading the
[100 Cupboards](http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1661390.100_Cupboards) series,
and not thinking about this project. The same author wrote
[Outlaws of Time](http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/25817037-the-legend-of-sam-miracle)
which I couldn't put down last year even though I was in bed with a fever at the time. N.D. Wilson is
the kind of writer who can paint a thousand pictures with every word, rendering an
action movie in real time in your imagination. Coincidentally, that book was inspired by a
dream while he himself was
[down with a fever](https://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2016/04/why-i-write-scary-stories-for-children/478977/).

Anyway enough distractions, I should put some thought into my own grammar!

Lisp is represented by [S-expressions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S-expression),
making it an easy grammar by any standards, certainly Mr Wilson's. I'm not dealing with
hash-map, string or numeric syntaxes yet either. All I have is lists of symbols.

Despite picking the easiest thing in the world to parse, it's been nearly half a lifetime
since I did this at university. This is going to take me a while to relearn. I'm definitely
going to feel not very smart for a while.

Things I have to consider:

* the empty list `()`, or `nil`
* dot notation: `(a . b)`
* list shorthand: `(a b c d e)`
* nestedness: `((a) b)` etc

## Internal representation

The data structure to represent these S-expressions isn't immediately obvious. In
the more Common Lisps, the empty list `()` is also represented by the symbol `nil`.
Does that mean empty list really is a symbol? Or is it a cons cell with both
values empty? Or both?

Thinking about it, it can only be one thing: a special symbol. Symbols and cons cells
are the only constructs available and if a cons cell has both values empty, then
what is the type of empty? Empty must be the `nil` symbol, alternatively written `()`.

Nextly, should we just use `Vec` to represent lists or should we go
[down that road](http://cglab.ca/~abeinges/blah/too-many-lists/book/first-new.html),
using a Cons-ish type to make a linked list? I'm inclined toward the latter, since
it's more historically accurate and I like history. And pain, apparently.

I don't really like pain and making a linked list structure in Rust does seem
inadvisable. It would also probably mean `Rc<Pair>` being a pervasive type throughout
my project, which I'm not excited about. It's not the memory managment model I'm
interested in exploring further down the road.

What this is beginning to look like is that we're not quite ready to parse.

I should have seen this coming. I've spent a couple years daydreaming about creating a
programming language and have always come back to the notion that memory management
is so fundamental that it must be the starting point. We're going to have to switch
tracks briefly.

There are so many options available and none, with the exception of `Rc`, are going
to be easy. I don't want to use `Rc`.

I just happen to have a copy of [The Garbage Collection Handbook](http://gchandbook.org/)
and I will now spend some time in it's pages.

Back soon...

## Memory management

I have decided. Further down the line we'll need a full fledged GC. Before we
get there, we'll need an allocator and an API to it that will remain reasonably stable.

My provisional plan is to build a hybrid mark-sweep/copying collector but that's a
little way off. That GC will need only a basic bump-pointer allocator, which I'm
happy about. We're kicking the complexity can down the road.

Quite coincidentally, a
[solution presented itself today](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/5weidf/no_stable_mallocfree_in_rust_stdlib/)
for backing `malloc` with `Vec` so that's where we'll begin. I won't even have to write
it myself because Jonathan Reem [has already done so](https://github.com/reem/rust-memalloc/)!

This setup will be temporary. For the full-fledged GC, we'll have to replace that with our own
custom allocator.

Because we're not going to have a full GC yet, we'll just be allocating into the
`Vec` without freeing anything. When the `Vec` is full, we'll panic with
out-of-memory.

## Implementing

New state of code
[tagged here](https://github.com/pliniker/eval-rs/tree/allocator).
I also made some minor changes to the lexer: renaming some things
and switching from line/char based iterating to purely char based iterating.

Here's what I started with for an allocator:

{% highlight rust %}
pub struct Arena {
    buffer: *mut u8,
    size: isize,
    bump: isize
}
{% endhighlight %}

where `bump` is the index to the next free location to allocate an object into and `buffer`
is the pointer to a contiguous segment of memory that will hold our objects.

An `Arena` is constructed simply thusly where `allocate()` comes from the `memalloc` crate:

{% highlight rust %}
impl Arena {
    pub fn new(size: isize) -> Arena {
        let buffer = unsafe { allocate(size as usize) };

        if buffer == ptr::null_mut() {
            panic!("could not allocate memory!");
        }

        Arena {
            buffer: buffer,
            size: size,
            bump: 0
        }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

Now we'll walk through the interesting part of the code: allocating space for a
new object and writing it into the `Arena`. To start with we'll write a test
that calls the `Arena::allocate<T>()` function and attempts to dereference
the pointer, testing that the memory location contains the expected data.
This `allocate()` function starts out empty, returning a null pointer.

The pointer is wrapped in a `Ptr<T>` type for which we implement `Deref` and `DerefMut`:

As expected, `cargo test` fails with a segfault for dereferencing a null pointer:

{% highlight rust %}
pub struct Ptr<T> {
    ptr: *mut T
}

impl Arena {
    pub fn allocate<T>(&mut self, object: T) -> Ptr<T> {
        // return a NULL pointer
        Ptr { ptr: ptr::null_mut() }
    }
}

#[cfg(test)]
{
    #[test]
    fn test_alloc_struct() {
        let mut mem = Arena::new(1024);
        let ptr = mem.allocate(Thing::new());
        assert!(ptr.check());  // dereference the pointer and check memory contents
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

Now we'll try to get the test to pass.

The first thing to do is check that there's enough `buffer` space left:

{% highlight rust %}
impl Arena {
    pub fn allocate<T>(&mut self, object: T) -> Ptr<T> {
        let next_bump = self.bump + (mem::size_of::<T>() as isize);
        if next_bump > self.size {
            panic!("out of memory!");
        }

        // return a NULL pointer
        Ptr { ptr: ptr::null_mut() }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

The test continues to segfault. We need to copy `object` into the `Arena` and
return a `Ptr` with a valid pointer.

{% highlight rust %}
impl Arena {
    pub fn allocate<T>(&mut self, object: T) -> Ptr<T> {
        let next_bump = self.bump + (mem::size_of::<T>() as isize);
        if next_bump > self.size {
            panic!("out of memory!");
        }

        let p = unsafe {
            let p = self.buffer.offset(self.bump) as *mut T;
            ptr::write(p, object);
            p
        };

        self.bump = next_bump;

        Ptr { ptr: p }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

What did we do there? We used
[std::ptr::offset()](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.pointer.html#method.offset)
to create a new pointer from
the `Arena` `buffer` pointer plus the value in `bump`. Then we used
[std::ptr::write()](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ptr/fn.write.html)
to copy `object` to the `buffer` starting at that new pointer address.

Finally we increment `bump` and return the wrapped pointer in a `Ptr<T>` abstraction.

Now the test passes!

I'll add another test to make sure our out-of-memory panic works:

{% highlight rust %}
#[cfg(test)]
{
    #[test]
    #[should_panic]
    fn test_out_of_memory() {
        let mut mem = Arena::new(1024);
        loop {
            let _ptr = mem.allocate(Thing::new());
        }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

and yes! It does! After implementing `Drop` for `Arena` so that `buffer` gets
deallocated properly, we have a basic allocator.

We will not implement dropping
the objects inside the allocator as that amounts to implementing finalizers
and I'm not going there. Whatever goes into `Arena` will have to be OK with
not having it's own `drop()` method being called.

In the making of this stage I consulted:

* [the wonderful people on /r/rust](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/5weidf/no_stable_mallocfree_in_rust_stdlib/)
* [std::ptr::write()](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ptr/fn.write.html)
* [the pointer type](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.pointer.html)

## Up next...

Next time we might get to do some parsing (*^‿^*)
