---
layout: post
title:  "RPL"
date:   2017-02-11 12:22 EST5EDT
categories: eval-rs
comments: true
---

# RPL

The first thing I want is the RPL in REPL. This'll give me a comfortable context
in which evaluation can be done. I'll want to read stdin one line at a time, unless
a filename is given on the command line to read in. To start with, I'll just echo
back everything given as input.

To implement this, I'm going to prefer popular, native-Rust, cross-platform (Linux
and Windows) crates wherever possible, rather than implementing this functionality
from scratch.

A search of [crates.io](http://crates.io) reveals these most popular crates:

* [clap-rs](https://crates.io/crates/clap) for command line argument parsing
* [rustyline](https://crates.io/crates/rustyline) for readline-like text entry

I am also going to stick with stable Rust as far as is possible.

The reality is that this first stage is going to be a lot of copying and pasting
from examples from the above mentioned crates. That's ok, this is going to get
harder later.

In general I want to handle errors elegantly, so I'm going to reference the excellent
error handling chapter in the future [Rust Book](https://rust-lang.github.io/book/) to
avoid unnecessary panicking.

## What I Implemented

* [State of the code](https://github.com/pliniker/eval-rs/tree/rpl).

I love the conciseness of the `load_file()` function. I iterated over various error
handling patterns until settling on this one. I was delighted to find, later, that
this is identical to the final example in the
[error handling section](https://rust-lang.github.io/book/ch09-02-recoverable-errors-with-result.html)
of the Rust Book!

{% highlight rust %}
fn load_file(filename: &str) -> Result<String, io::Error> {
    let mut contents = String::new();

    File::open(filename)?.read_to_string(&mut contents)?;

    Ok(contents)
}
{% endhighlight %}

### clap-rs

`clap` provides several methods for declaring command line options. In the end I
returned to the first listed method, an explicit builder pattern. There seemed no
advantage to the other methods for a single optional filename.

### rustyline

It's not clear that this is going to be the right choice in the long term, but
I don't have enough information about the future yet. I can imagine wanting
contextually meaningful multi-line input at some point but I don't know `rustyline`
well enough to know if I can do this.

For now, all `Err(_)`s are exit conditions. I'm not distinguishing between actual
errors and intentional termination by Ctrl-D, for example. That's for later.

{% highlight rust %}
    loop {
        let readline = reader.readline("# ");

        match readline {
            // valid input
            Ok(line) => {
                reader.add_history_entry(&line);
                println!("{}", line);
            }

            // some kind of termination condition
            Err(e) => {
                if let Some(ref path) = history_file {
                    reader.save_history(&path).unwrap_or_else(|err| {
                        println!("could not save input history in {}: {}", path, err);
                    });
                }

                return Err(e);
            }
        }
    }
{% endhighlight %}

## Up next...

That's all for this time around. It didn't take much time to implement this step,
but it was my first time for using either of the third party crates and this kind
of application in Rust so I had to reference a reasonable amount of documentation
that I have had the luxury of glossing over in the past.

In the next installment I'm expecting to parse the input, converting it to some
internal representation, and be able to print that data structure back to `stdout`.
