---
layout: post
title:  "Plugging the Safety Hole"
date:   2017-06-16 12:22 EST5EDT
categories: eval-rs
comments: true
---

# Where in the world

Portland, that's where! I went to [PyCon](http://us.pycon.org/) which
was the best because I've been programming in Python for years and had
gotten pretty tired of it. PyCon helped me see all the reasons to really
appreciate the design of Python and CPython and the tradeoffs they've made.

In particular, trading efficiency for really good C interop.

I knew this but now I have a bigger respect for the tradeoff in light of
the [Gilectomy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pLqv11ScGsQ) and
[Micropython](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d7qEzpnkWaY) and that it is
worth it. It also helped me see what I'd like out of an interpreted language
written in Rust.

To be fair though, what had really wearied me with Python was working with
some expansive codebases like [OpenStack](https://github.com/openstack)
and [SaltStack](https://github.com/saltstack/). Both systems have given
me endless games of whack-a-mole, tracking down bugs that would probably
not have occurred in a statically typed language. Not Python's fault
though, I just have my doubts about duck typing everywhere all the time
in large codebases.

My favorite part of PyCon though? I got to see a really good
[friend](https://github.com/underrun) for the first time in years and
hang out with other wonderfully fun people. Portland itself though... hmmm!


## What safety hole? I don't remember...

Anyway, in [Episode VI](https://pliniker.github.io/post/eval-rs-05/) I said:

> If anybody cared to look at `memory.rs` they might have considered that
> `Ptr<T>` references memory in an `Arena` but the lifetime of `Ptr<T>` is
> not limited to the lifetime of the `Arena` it is connected to. I've let
> some possible use-after-free unsafety leak out.
>
> I thought about this, and tried adding an explicit lifetime to `Ptr<T>`, and
> thought about it some more. These lifetimes are viral and start cluttering
> everything up. I don't like it, yet it would be the right thing to do.
>
> I'm not going to do it.

I did it. I couldn't let this go. It was really hard (for me.) I cried,
got angry, broke up with Rust, leaned on Python's shoulder, got back together
to work through our differences, was interrupted by life a thousand times and
finally copied and modified somebody else's solution.

[Here is today's diff](https://github.com/pliniker/eval-rs/commit/51704f3d7339c01752357f8100be528f5f2a75c2).
I'm going to try to explain what's going on here...


## In which I explain

After failing to wrap my head around the lifetime problem through
my own brain power, I went looking
for repositories with allocators to see what other people had implemented.

I reviewed a good number of hobby interpreters written in Rust on GitHub,
and of those that did not use `Rc<T>` and had implemented some kind of
allocator, not one had explicitly through lifetimes umbilically tethered
pointers to their mother allocator. Either I'm not the only person with potential
use-after-free or they used ways I didn't see to define a safe-Rust API that
can't accidentally leak dead object pointers. Going to assume the latter
right this second.

Finally I searched for allocator crates and came to [rphmeier](https://twitter.com/rphmeier)'s
[allocators](https://github.com/rphmeier/allocators) crate in which, joy,
I found pointer and allocator types that explicitly prevent, at
compile time, pointers from outliving their allocator.

I've taken these types and modified them to fit my use case.

My pointer type now takes an `Allocator` type
instance and a lifetime that is bound to the `Allocator` and it ties the
pointer type to that `Allocator` using `std::marker::PhantomData`. Thus
the connection only exists at compile time and the pointer type
remains just a pointer with no additional runtime baggage.

{% highlight rust %}
pub struct Ptr<'a, T, A: 'a + Allocator> {
    ptr: *mut T,
    _marker: PhantomData<&'a A>
}
{% endhighlight %}

I also created the `Allocator` type similarly to how `allocators` does it.

{% highlight rust %}
pub trait Allocator {
    fn alloc<T>(&self, object: T) -> Ptr<T, Self> where Self: Sized;
}
{% endhighlight %}

At first I made `fn alloc<T>(&self...)` take `&mut self` because it seemed
logical that an allocator is a mutable thing (without noting that `allocators`
uses `&self`.)

Later I realized that the system allocator behaves more like a global data
structure that is implicitly mutably aliased everywhere. With that in mind,
I updated `Allocator::alloc()` to take `&self` and use interior mutability
instead of taking `&mut self`. This solved many compile errors.

(The `SymbolMap` type also uses interior mutability now, too, for similarish
reasons.)

Still, just by adding explicit lifetimes and refactoring allocation into
a trait left me with so many horrible compiler errors that I played
non-duck-typing static-checking I-don't-quite-understand whack-a-mole for
some time.

Now that I look at the final diff, though, the changes are logical and
consistent.

The `<'a, A: 'a + Allocator>` parameters and bounds, simply, are pervasive.


## Up next...

Holy moly it took a long time to get here from the previous post. Worst
blog series ever.

I'd like to actually begin traversing the AST and doing something with
it next!
