---
layout: post
title:  "Mapping Names to Symbols to Names"
date:   2017-04-19 12:22 EST5EDT
categories: eval-rs
comments: true
---

# Thrashing

I'm in cognitive overload. At work I've been solo on a project that's big
enough that every time I turn to look at a different piece of it, the last
thing I worked on gets swapped out of my memory and I have to relearn the
new current thing.

At the turn of the month we drove a total of 28 hours over 3 days to Oklahoma
and back for a wedding. With four childrens. I'm ready for more! Almost
recovered. This was massively disruptive as everything I was thinking about
with regard to evalrus got swapped out of my brain completely, including
enthusiasm for it.

I now have my very own not-for-sale-outside-the-Indian-subcontinent copy
of The Dragon Book. It's a lot more accessible than I remember! I often
think I'd get a lot more out of my CS degree now than I did 18 years ago.


## Copying Collection and Lifetimes

And now, some thoughts on managed memory and Rust semantics.

If anybody cared to look at `memory.rs` they might have considered that
`Ptr<T>` references memory in an `Arena` but the lifetime of `Ptr<T>` is
not limited to the lifetime of the `Arena` it is connected to. I've let
some possible use-after-free unsafety leak out.

I thought about this, and tried adding an explicit lifetime to `Ptr<T>`, and
thought about it some more. These lifetimes are viral and start cluttering
everything up. I don't like it, yet it would be the right thing to do.

I'm not going to do it. Here's why:

If I tie a `Ptr<T>` to the lifetime of an `Arena`, the compiler can
reasonably assume that a borrow of a `Ptr<T>` can last the lifetime of
the `Arena`.

If I want to implement a copying collector, an object that is moved has
an unpredictable lifetime from Rust's point of view. The object continues
to exist but any references to it would be invalid pointers.

If I implement a copying collector, I don't want to be able
to take long term references to `Ptr<T>`s anywhere - I have to be able to identify
every `Ptr<T>` and update it to point to the new object location after
it has been moved.

It seems to me that there's something of a fundamental incompatibility
between lifetimes and runtime garbage collection, especially if objects
can be relocated. I don't know what the answer is, if any. A
compromise that leaks unsafety under specific circumstances may be the
best outcome.

Part of my problem here is that I still don't fully grasp the power of
lifetimes and Rust's type system. I come from a C/C++ and Python background
so I'm used to unsafety. Creating safe abstractions is still a new
challenge.


## Symbol Mapping

Here's a light memory management problem that had my brain tied in pretzels
for a bit.

A symbol has a name represented by a string, but should be refered to
in the interpreter by an address for simplicity and performance sake. Each
symbol should be unique, there shouldn't be a duplicate of any, so comparing
any two symbols of the same name should, under the hood, compare their
pointers to find equality.

The simple problem in my code is that a `Symbol` should be stored in an
`Arena` - runtime managed memory. But where should it's `str` representation
live? Additionally, I need to map `str`s to `Symbol`s bidirectionally. That
suggests a `HashMap` but a `HashMap` is entirely Rust-managed.

I finally arrived at a solution. There are probably others, possibly better ones.

{% highlight rust %}
pub struct SymbolMap {
    map: HashMap<String, Ptr<Symbol>>
}
{% endhighlight %}

where a `Symbol` holds a copy of the raw `&str` fat pointer representation of the
`String` key.

{% highlight rust %}
#[derive(Copy, Clone)]
pub struct Symbol {
    name_ptr: *const u8,
    name_len: usize,
}
{% endhighlight %}

The entire `impl` of `Symbol` is

{% highlight rust %}
impl Symbol {
    pub fn new<M>(value: &String, mem: &mut M) -> Ptr<Symbol> where M: Allocator {
        mem.alloc(Symbol {
            name_ptr: value.as_str().as_ptr(),
            name_len: value.as_str().len(),
        })
    }

    pub fn as_str(&self) -> &str {
        unsafe {
            let slice = slice::from_raw_parts(self.name_ptr, self.name_len);
            str::from_utf8(slice).unwrap()
        }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

`SymbolMap`s implementation is also simple:

{% highlight rust %}
impl SymbolMap {
    pub fn new() -> SymbolMap {
        SymbolMap {
            map: HashMap::new()
        }
    }

    pub fn lookup<M>(&mut self, name: &String, mem: &mut M) -> Ptr<Symbol>
        where M: Allocator
    {
        // Can't take a map.entry(name) without providing an owned String, i.e. cloning 'name'
        // Can't insert a new entry with just a reference without hashing twice, and cloning 'name'
        // Which is the lesser weevil? Perhaps making lookups fast and inserts slower.

        { // appease le borrow chequer inside this block
            if let Some(ptr) = self.map.get(name) {
                return ptr.clone();
            }
        }

        let name = name.clone();
        let ptr = Symbol::new(&name, mem);
        self.map.insert(name, ptr);
        ptr
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

As the comments say, I decided to make name lookups the fast path and creating
new symbols the slow path. 

Symbols are helpfully immutable - `SymbolMap` doesn't allow modifying a Symbol
name after it has been created. This means that the internal pointer and size
of the name won't ever change and we can safely take copies of them for
the `Symbol` type. So long as the `HashMap` outlives any `Arena`s containing
`Symbol`s we should be ok. Enforcing that relationship at compile time?
Your suggestions most desirous.

At least now the RPL prints out symbol names correctly and that is very good!

If you look through the source code, you'll see that I abstracted the `Arena`
interface out into an `Allocator` trait. This will make it easier to refactor
memory management down the road.


## Up next...

Not sure. Still trying to regain momentum.
